# Predicting and characterizing music genres<br/>STAT  471 Final Project<br/>Najete Benmansour, Yan Meiri<br/>December 19, 2021

According to the Wikipedia definition, a music genre is "a conventional category that identifies some pieces of music as belonging to a shared tradition or set of conventions". Many different genres and even mix of genres exist nowadays. Users can even find it hard to classify some of the music they listen to or songs in general as belonging to a specific genre. Reading through Spotify's API's description, we found out that the music platform has created a set of features to characterize a song and it made us wonder if these features might allow us to predict and therefore characterize the genre of music a song belongs to. A classification like this one would permit defining what the genre of a song really is and could be beneficial to improve music recommendation systems.


Our dataset pulled data from two sources : the Spotify developer API, which allowed us to retrieve the audio features of the songs that were going to be part of the dataset and the LastFM API, which we used to find the genre of each of the tracks. The study focused on six music genres : Country, Hip-Hop, Jazz, Pop, RnB and Rock.

 
Before exploring our data or running any analyses, we split our data into a training dataset and a test dataset, with the test dataset reserved for assessing and comparing model performance. Then, we explored our data to assess correlations between variables and between variables and the response. In order to build an optimal predictive model, we then built three different cross-validated models: a classification tree, random forest and a multi-class logistic model. We also tried to implement a boosting model in addition to the other tree-based models, but the multi-class classification seemed to cause an exremely high misclassification and we therefore chose to take out this model.

 
Unfortunately, it looks like none of the models we used were efficient enough to create a real and accurate tool for classifying music genre. We think that it is unlikely that the  inaccuracy of our models could have been caused by some class imbalances seeing how we made sure that each of the classes would be roughly equivalently represented. It could then be caused by a lack of correlation between the set of features created by Spotify or by a dataset too small to tackle such a big classification task.